#100375386#

**In what ways were British art and culture political in the Nineteenth Century?**


With the nineteenth century being a viable turning point within English society, the dawn of the industrial revolution pivoted not only technology within the time, but also art and culture. The Nineteenth Century was a time of change and uproar in copious ways, studies of the time depicting unique momentous change within the century.

These changes stemming from social unrest were inherently political. With countless uprisings throughout England, protests leaked from every inch of society. These changes, however, were not the creation of purely physical uprisings from labourers, but also the art and culture of the middle and upper class society took hits as well. The Arts became a politically charged area, ensuring their views on the new found changes were heard and their support of the uprisings accepted. With new genres of artists arising throughout the century, awareness and support were gained, causing unity across the country regardless of classes. Significant change was achieved through uprisings and protests, both physical and visual.

The dawn of the Romantic Artists created newfound political awareness within the art community and upper class culture of the nineteenth century. Art had never been so politically charged. The romantics created a stark contrast between their ideology and art compared to the past neoclassicism era. Romanticism within art has been defined by art historian Kathryn Calley Galitz as a response to the disillusionment with the Enlightenment values of reason and order in the aftermath of the French Revolution of 1789. Its overall characteristic was a new emotionalism, compared to the prevailing ideas of classical restraint. She refers to it {Romanticism}, as first defined as an aesthetic in literary criticism around 1800, gained momentum as an artistic movement in France and Britain in the early decades of the nineteenth century, and flourished until the mid-century. With its emphasis on imagination and emotion, Romanticism emerged as a response to the disillusionment with the Enlightenment values of reason and order in the aftermath of the French Revolution of 1789.'This newfound aesthetic already politically charged with its creation contrasts with the previous era of neoclassicism; an era defined as a reflection of desire to rekindle the spirit and forms of classical art from ancient Greece and Rome, whose principles of order and reason were entirely in accord with the European Age of Enlightenment. Neoclassism portrayed beautiful, realistic classical homages to history that only the rich and educated could perceive and understand, whereas this new era of realism ensured messages were strongly stated, and the homage was paid to nature against the demonic feat of industrialism. 

Through this newfound era within art at such a tumultuous time there was no doubt that their response to disillusionment would be politically charged, these artists protested through beautiful depictions of classical landscapes as a support for the plights and uprisings throughout the country, they depicted english landscapes as sullied by industrialisation bringing forth visual depictions of what they believed was the cause of so much tension.These romanticised creations were a homage to the preindustrial state of the UK, John Constables 'The Hay Wain' an oil painting depicting a scenic landscape in the countryside marred with dark clouds, critics believing it as a depiction of the nearing darkness of the industrial age, whilst Constable had usually produced landscapes he was usually met with contempt until the nineteenth century were they used as political tools by Rural conservatives - such as Constable- to provide proof of the damage they believed would be caused by industrialisation. However, these subtle pieces of beautiful romanticised landscape wasn't the only form of political art during the time. Many artists produced starkly obvious apposing pieces that were with, but also some pieces were marred with tragedies, as seen by (picture of fire town). These pieces showed what the artists believed would be the fate of England if the industrial revolution was not resolved. depictions of vicious fires and towns burning encompassed society as a stark warning and support for the uprisings. These once favoured peaceful luxurious pieces had become marred with politics and bought this plight to the upper classes.

The Romantic fight against industrialisation within rural lands wasn't the only concept within art that had become political. The nineteenth century Romantic art was also renowned for being abolitionist and anti slavery, pieces such as Turner's ‘The Slave Ship’ causing so much ruckus with in high society that protests took place and an increase of support for abolitionists occurred, leading to the ban of slavery within London: the biggest city for slave trade at the time. The painting depicts the slave ship ‘Zong', where countless slaves were left at sea to die. It is said Turner had read about the ship within an abolitionist edition by Thomas Clarkson, which had influenced him to use his standing as a public figure to show what atrocities were happening, especially as it coincided with the international abolitionist campaigns within the 1840s. By using his public standing to portray such a horrific moment to influence others to join the abolitionist movement, he creates an inherently political environment that inspires change and questions of the government's views. 

However, some critics don’t believe this piece was a political protest, but instead of a way to profit from the era's uprisings and tensions of the era, critic Sarah Fulford claims the dying slaves are completely disregarded in order to "aestheticize the horror of slavery in a moment of sublimity.” She goes on to explain how this aesthetic piece was utilised t commercialise and profits the rising tensions within the country during the 19th century and not a genuine protest compared to little known artist Eyre Crowe. Crowe became renowned for using his art as a political landscape to hinder slave trade auctions and depict the true atrocities that were occurring in a way that the public was able to understand and empathise with, this empathy stemmed from the countless feelings of oppression caused by poverty during the industrial period. In his painting ‘Slaves Waiting for Sale in Virginia’ exhibited in the Royal Gallery in 1861, he paints the slaves surrounding large industrial machinery, depicting the two largest issues of the time as equal and possibly as industrialisation being the cause of oppression. This piece politicised discussions within various newspapers and created discussion nationally with Art Journal describing it as ‘one of the most important pictures in the exhibition" and wrote, "The appalling guilt of that accursed system was never more successfully depicted”. Artists were able to use the craft to create discussion and similarities, believing it was their job as public figures to embrace change. Art historian Daniel M. Fox claims this new fangled political nature within art was because ‘the most important nineteenth-century innovation in the relation between artists to aid patrons was the administration of patronage by governments theoretically based on the consent of the governed. A belief in the necessity of public support for artists developed with the growth of the liberal nationalistic state.'This was the belief that support for art was gained by pandering to the public's perception, and within an era of political unrest, the only way to achieve this support would be through political art pieces. 

With regard to political impact within culture and theatres in 19th century Britain, the largest impact may arguably be from the popularisation of authors Charles Dickens and Oscar Wilde. For instance, the extremely popular novels of Dickens had an immense impact on society in the nineteenth century. It bought about political conversations and influenced copious amounts of people who utilised this reading as a means to understand the uprisings and general unrest of the century. Dickens was able to depict multiple struggles within society at the time from multiple points of view, allowing an increase in empathy between the classes. Furthermore, Dickens was a famed socialist and included these views within his novels, in his novels, creating socially and politically charged discussions that influenced the general separatist culture of the time. Dickens believed in the ethical and political potential of literature and how it could be enabled to inform the masses of countless pieces of information, especially within a time when it was socially and politically relevant to the rising political animosity the industrial revolution brought forth. Dickens believed that it was ones political and social commitment to participate with social uprisings and support of the proletariat within a letter to his friend Wilkie Collins dated September 6, 1858, Dickens writes of this importance: “Everything that happens […] shows beyond mistake that you can’t shut out the world; that you are in it, to be of it; that you get yourself into a false position the moment you try to sever yourself from it; that you must mingle with it, and make the best of it, and make the best of yourself into the bargain” Dickens explains how paramount an empathetical approach to societal issues within Victorian culture would be, by utilising his words within literature to embrace change in the upper classes he introduces them to the politics of the masses. 

Complimentary to this, author and political activist Oscar Wilde utilised his influence within the arts and high culture to release an essay expounding the libertarian socialist worldview and the effect of change that was occurring at the time. ‘The Soul of Man under Socialism’ Wilde claimed that ‘With the abolition of private property, then, we shall have true, beautiful, healthy Individualism. Nobody will waste his life in accumulating things, and the symbols for things. One will live. To live is the rarest thing in the world. Most people exist, that is all'. This deeply political belief became extremely relevant after numerous protests arose throughout England due to newfound laws regarding property and an influx of poverty due to stifling home prices. Wilde utilises his fame as an author within high culture to embrace these political uprisings and show his support, as well as new political theologies that support the actions of his fellow Englishmen. 

To concur, members of the arts utilised the rising tensions of the nineteenth century to embrace real change within the culture of the time. They were able to employ their skills to create imagery, both visual and literal, in order to produce political pieces that were influential on society as we know it. By harnessing their influence and talents, they bridged the gap between classes and embraced the readily political nature of the time, whether that be to profit or inflict real change. 

